The kidneys are bean-shaped organs
in your back under your ribs.
Part of the urinary system,
they filter extra water and
wastes from the blood
to produce urine.
Urine passes from the kidneys
to the bladder through the ureters,
and from the bladder
through the urethra to leave the body.
Kidney stones or calculi
are mineral and salt deposits
that form inside the kidneys.
They build up in layers over time
and can be the size of a grain of sand,
a pearl or even a golf ball.
Small stones can stay in the kidney,
or pass easily without causing problems.
A larger stone can get stuck in the ureter,
bladder or urethra,
block the flow of urine
and be extremely painful.
When a stone does not pass,
it may be treated with shock waves
or lithotripsy,
directed from outside or inside your body,
which break the stones into smaller
pieces that can pass.
Other treatment may involve using a scope
to explore the urethra,
bladder and ureters
or less often
an open surgical procedure
to find and remove the stone.